BUILD 2026 Demo: Using AI tools to teach old apps new tricks (BRK220)
Zava Bank: The Modernization Journey
Premise: Zava Bank is a 30-year-old regional bank facing regulatory pressure, rising maintenance costs, and customer demand for digital banking. Their tech stack is a time capsule — COBOL on mainframes, legacy Java services, ASP.NET Web Forms apps, and everything running on-prem.
The CEO’s mandate: “Modernize everything. We need to be cloud-native in 6 months or we lose our competitive edge.”
  
Act 1: Mainframe Modernization 🏗️
“The core banking engine runs on COBOL. Nobody wants to touch it, and the two people who understand it are retiring.”
Zava Bank’s loan processing system — written in COBOL in the 1990s — handles 50K transactions/day. The team modernized the COBOL loan-processing modules into a Java application(Zava Ledger) — preserving the business logic that took decades to refine, now running as a modern, maintainable codebase.
But that’s just one app. The mainframe migration produced a Java service — and now it sits alongside hundreds of other apps across the organization, all in varying states of tech debt.
“Great, we modernized the mainframe. But we have 200+ other apps. How do we modernize at scale?”
  
Act 2: Modernize at Scale
Now the converted mainframe app has joined the portfolio. It’s time to modernize everything — systematically, with governance, and across both Java and .NET ecosystems.
But first — we need to understand what we have.
  
2.1 — Meet the Apps: Zava Bank’s Portfolio 🏦
Persona: Developer | DEMO: Show app portfolios in VS & VS Code
“This is what 30 years of building software looks like.”
We open by showing two groups of apps that keep Zava Bank running:
In Visual Studio — the .NET portfolio: 
-	ZavaLoan Portal — the customer-facing loan application (ASP.NET Web Forms) 
-	ZavaAccount Manager — internal account administration tool (.NET Framework) - ZavaRisk Engine — credit risk scoring service (WCF) 
-	ZavaNotify — customer notification service (legacy .NET console app)
In VS Code — the Java portfolio: 
-	ZavaPay Gateway — payment processing service (Struts 1.x, Java 8) 
-	ZavaLedger — the converted mainframe core banking engine (Java 17) //todo use same app that was modenized from mainframe earlier 
-	ZavaFraud Detector — real-time fraud analysis (Struts 2.x, Java 11) 
-	ZavaKYC Service — Know Your Customer compliance checks (Java 8, legacy servlets)


“Now, I could go into each one of these apps, run the Copilot Modernization agent, get an assessment, and repeat for the next one. But that’s 8 apps here — and we have 200+ across the org. Wouldn’t it be awesome if we could assess all of them together, at scale?”
  
2.2 — Assess at Scale: The Modernize CLI (Now GA) 🚀
Persona: Architect | DEMO: Modernize CLI — Assessment at Scale
“Same GitHub Copilot Modernization agent. Now in a CLI built for at-scale operations.”
Notes: Project already setup and no explicit project creation step here.
Introduce the Modernize CLI — it brings the same GitHub Copilot Modernization agent that powers the IDE experience into a purpose-built CLI. It’s multipurpose: use its TUI (Terminal UI) experience interactively, or go headless and execute in a DevOps pipeline. Same intelligence, different interface.
You can run the Modernize CLI locally against repos on your machine, or link it to your GitHub repositories and run against them directly.
Demo Steps:
1.	Show the repos.json file — a manifest listing all of Zava Bank’s repositories to assess.
2.	Run the Modernize CLI in TUI mode:
 	The CLI fans out across all repositories, running the Copilot Modernization agent against each one — in parallel, no IDE required.
3.	Switch to GitHub Agent HQ — show the assessment process running live. Each repository is being analyzed by the agent. 
4.	While the assessment is running, show bootstrapping Azure Migrate modernize CLI with the config.json. (Show sample only and talk about estate tool integration) 
5.	Show the results — the agent has produced:
o	Individual app reports — detailed per-repo assessments committed directly into each repository as a Pull Request, so the team that owns that repo gets their findings right where they work
o	Consolidated report - Also generates a consolidated report when assessed together.
  
2.3 — Announcing Command Center (Private Preview) 📊
Persona: App Owner / Architect | DEMO: Command Center
Notes: Project already setup and no explicit project creation step here.
“Developers got their PRs. But what about the people responsible for the entire portfolio?”
Now announce the private preview of the Command Center — the place where App Owners and Architects monitor modernization at scale.
Demo Steps:
1.	Open the Command Center — show that all assessment reports are accessible in one place. All apps are visible, categorized by technology (.NET, Java), risk level, and modernization readiness.
2.	Walk through the portfolio view — everything at a glance:
o	Portfolio-wide technology breakdown and effort estimation
o	Which apps are on unsupported frameworks, which have critical vulnerabilities
o	Prioritized modernization order based on risk, effort, and business value
3.	Show the dashboard — the Command Center isn’t just a dashboard. From here, App Owners and Architects can decide what to modernize next, initiate planning, and set the governance guardrails for execution. We will talk more about that later.
“Assessment told us WHERE we are. Now we need to decide HOW we get there — with governance.”
  
2.4 — Planning with Guardrails: The Rulebook 📋🔒
Persona: Architect | DEMO: Rulebook + Plan Comparison
Notes: Demo in: Command Center. No Playbook creation. Only attaching to a plan.
“We can’t have 15 teams modernizing in 15 different ways. We need standards — starting at the plan.”
Before any modernization work begins, Zava Bank’s architects define a Rulebook — a codified set of organizational standards, architectural patterns, and compliance requirements. When a team creates a modernization plan, the rulebook is attached, and the plan is automatically shaped by its rules. 
The rulebook enforces things like:
•	Target cloud platform must be Azure, approved SKUs
•	All services must use managed identity (no connection string secrets)
•	Logging must use structured telemetry (OpenTelemetry/App Insights)
•	Database access must use parameterized queries only
•	All apps must include health check endpoints
One Rulebook, Two Ecosystems
The same rulebook works across both .NET and Java. The rules are expressed at an architectural intent level, not a framework-specific level:
Rulebook Rule	.NET Implementation	Java Implementation
Use managed identity	Azure.Identity + DefaultAzureCredential	azure-identity + DefaultAzureCredentialBuilder
Structured telemetry	OpenTelemetry.Extensions.Hosting	opentelemetry-javaagent
Health checks	Microsoft.Extensions.Diagnostics.HealthChecks	Spring Boot Actuator /health
No secrets in config	Azure Key Vault + SecretClient	Azure Key Vault + SecretClient
Parameterized DB queries	EF Core / Dapper parameters	JPA / PreparedStatement
Demo: Two Agent Plans, Same Rulebook — .NET vs Java
To show the power of the rulebook in action, generate two plans from the assessment — one for a .NET app, one for a Java app — and compare them side by side:
Plan A — ZavaLoan Portal (.NET): Web Forms → Blazor + Aspire + Azure - Migrate Web Forms → Blazor components - Enable .NET Aspire for orchestration and service defaults - Deploy to Azure Container Apps - Managed identity via DefaultAzureCredential - Health checks via Microsoft.Extensions.Diagnostics.HealthChecks - Telemetry via OpenTelemetry + App Insights 
Plan B — ZavaPay Gateway (Java): Struts → Spring Boot + AKS - Migrate Struts → Spring Boot 3.x - Containerize with Dockerfile + Helm chart - Deploy to AKS with pod-managed identity - Health checks via Spring Boot Actuator (liveness + readiness probes) - Telemetry via OpenTelemetry Java agent + App Insights
Walk through the diff — completely different tech stacks, completely different deployment targets, but the same rulebook rules applied to both: managed identity, structured telemetry, health checks, no secrets in config,. Show the compliance task tracing in the plan that shows which policies influenced each task. The rulebook ensures consistency at the governance level while each plan adapts to its ecosystem.
“Different languages. Different frameworks. Different deployment targets. Same guardrails. That’s what governance at scale looks like.”
  
2.5 — Extensibility Create Custom Logic: Custom Skills 🧩
Persona: Developer | DEMO: Custom Skills
“We have internal compliance rules that no generic tool understands.”
Custom Skills are a developer feature — they let teams encode their own domain-specific logic into the modernization agent. While the rulebook governs the plan, custom skills govern the execution.
Zava Bank’s developers have authored custom skills for:
•	PII handling — ensures no customer PII (SSN, account numbers) appears in log statements during migration
•	Zava Bank error codes — maps legacy error handling to Zava Bank’s standardized error response format
•	ZavaQueue messaging library — Zava Bank uses an internal messaging queue wrapper (ZavaQueue) across all services; this custom skill ensures the agent recognizes ZavaQueue calls and correctly migrates them to the target framework’s patterns
  
2.6 — Execute the Java Workstream: Struts → Spring Boot + Azure ☕
Persona: Developer | DEMO: VS Code — Modernization Agent + Custom Skills
“Our payment gateway is stuck on Struts 1.x and Java 8. Nobody wants to touch it.”
Two core workstreams drive Zava Bank’s modernization: - Java path: Struts → Spring Boot + containerization + Azure - .NET path: WebForms → Blazor + Aspire + Azure
We start with Java — in VS Code.
Demo Steps:
1.	Open the ZavaPay Gateway in VS Code — show the Struts 1.x codebase: action classes, XML configs, Java 8 syntax.
2.	Show the custom skills included in the workspace — the developer has the Zava Bank custom skills loaded:
o	PII handling skill
o	Zava Bank error codes skill
o	ZavaQueue messaging library skill
3.	Run the Modernization Agent in VS Code — execute the plan against the ZavaPay Gateway. The agent begins migrating Struts action classes to Spring Boot controllers, upgrading Java 8 → 21, converting Struts XML configs to Spring Boot annotations, and containerizing the app with a Dockerfile.
4.	Show Custom Skills in action — as the agent migrates code, the PII custom skill catches a logger.info("Processing customer SSN: " + ssn) line and redacts it. The ZavaQueue skill correctly migrates the internal messaging library calls to Spring Boot’s messaging patterns.
5.	Show the result — a fully modernized Spring Boot 3.x app, containerized, with Azure-ready configuration. The PR includes all changes with clear commit messages.
This is a repeatable process — the same agent, same rulebook, same custom skills can be applied to every Java app in the portfolio.
  
2.7 — Execute the .NET Workstream: Web Forms → Blazor + Aspire + Azure 🔄🚀
Persona: Developer | DEMO: Visual Studio — Modernization Agent + Custom Skills
“Our customer portal looks like it’s from 2008 — because it is.”
Now switch to the .NET workstream — in Visual Studio.

GA for Aspire and Preview for Web Forms 
Demo Steps:
1.	Open the ZavaLoan Portal in Visual Studio — show the Web Forms codebase: .aspx pages, code-behind files, ViewState, server controls.
2.	Show the custom skills included — the same Zava Bank custom skills are loaded here too:
o	PII handling skill
o	Zava Bank error codes skill
o	ZavaQueue messaging library skill
3.	Run the Modernization Agent in Visual Studio — execute the plan to migrate Web Forms → Blazor.
The UI Transformation [GA]
Before — Web Forms: - A clunky multi-step loan application wizard with full-page postbacks between each step - Server-round-trip validation that wipes your form on error — users lose progress and start over - A GridView showing loan history with no client-side sorting, filtering, or pagination - An UpdatePanel with a “Loading…” spinner that freezes the entire page during async operations - Fixed-width layout that doesn’t work on mobile — customers can’t apply for loans from their phone
After — Blazor: - A smooth single-page step-to-step experience with real-time inline validation — errors appear as you type, no data loss - An interactive loan calculator — drag a slider to adjust loan amount and term, see monthly payments update instantly - A filterable, sortable, searchable loan history table with virtual scrolling for performance - A live approval status tracker — real-time updates via SignalR as the loan moves through underwriting - Fully responsive — the same portal works beautifully on desktop, tablet, and mobile
Same business logic. Same loan workflow. Completely transformed experience.
Then — Enable .NET Aspire  [GA]
The newly converted Blazor app is then enhanced with .NET Aspire — adding orchestration, service defaults, OpenTelemetry, and managed Azure connections. The rulebook’s telemetry and health check requirements? Already satisfied by Aspire’s defaults. The rulebook and Aspire are naturally aligned.
  
2.8 — Manage the Projects: Back to Command Center 📊✅
Persona: App Owner | DEMO: Progress Report in Command Center
“Show me where we stand.”
The App Owner returns to the Command Center to see the modernization progress across the entire portfolio. The dashboard shows:
•	ZavaPay Gateway — migrated from Struts → Spring Boot 3.x, containerized, deployed to AKS ✅
•	ZavaLoan Portal — converted from Web Forms → Blazor + Aspire, deployed to Azure Container Apps ✅
•	Remaining apps — prioritized, with plans ready, rulebook attached
Emphasis on Assess->Plan->Execute steps that was followed.
A customer applies for a loan → Blazor portal → Java payment service → ZavaLedger core banking logic — all in Azure, all governed by the same rulebook, all observable in Application Insights.
“Same rulebook governed both the Java and .NET modernizations. That’s why everything just works together.”
From the Command Center, let’s see these apps running in action.
  
2.9 — See It Running: Apps in Azure 🌐
“Show me everything working together.”
All the modernized apps are live in Azure.
Demo Steps:
1.	Show the apps running in Azure — walk through the Azure portal:
o	ZavaPay Gateway — Spring Boot 3.x running in AKS
o	ZavaLoan Portal — Blazor + Aspire running in Azure Container Apps
2.	Walk the end-to-end flow — a customer applies for a loan:
o	Opens the Blazor portal → fills out the loan application
3.	The punchline — this is the same loan workflow that ran on a mainframe last year. Same business logic. Now it’s a Java app, running cloud-native on Azure, observable, and governed.
“From mainframe COBOL to Java. From on-prem to Azure. From manual to governed. That’s the modernization journey.”
  
🔮One more thing - AI Infusion — Chat Agent in the App
Can we show a chat agent embedded in the ZavaLoan Portal? Imagine a customer interacting with an AI-powered loan advisor — asking questions about rates, eligibility, application status — all powered by Azure OpenAI, running inside the modernized Blazor app. The ultimate demo moment: a legacy mainframe COBOL app → modernized to Java → cloud-native on Azure → with AI infused. The full arc from 1990s to 2026.
  
Tagline: “From mainframe to cloud-native to AI Infusion — governed by one rulebook, modernized by GitHub Copilot modernization, running on Azure.”

 
Demo recording Instructions
TODO: Create sub sections and provide detailed demo recording instructions.
2.2 — Assess at Scale: Modernize CLI
1.	Download the latest version of modernize CLI from Releases · devdiv-azure-service-dmitryr/modernize-cli. Add the folder to your system path. (0.0.413 and 0.0.410 have been tested)
2.	Create a blank repo in github, to serve as central repo, for example “BUILD2026CentralRepo”
3.	Create config.json file in ~\.modernize folder, turn on these two feature flags and put central repo url inside
{
"feature_flags": {
    "playbook  ": true,
"command_center": true,
"enable_dotnet_upgrade_assessment": true
  },
  "command_center": {
    "repo": {"url": "[https://github.com/xinyiz1226/BUILD2026CentralRepo](replace with your repo url created in #2)"}
  }
}
4.	Run “modernize cc init” to initialize 
 
5.	Prepare a repos.json locally. copy it from ZavaBank repos.json. (use app repos inside this json file directly, don’t fork. It has some configurations for CCA setup there)
6.	Register apps, create project, associate apps with a project, run assessment
Register all apps to command center via modernize cli:
Register apps:
-	modernize cc app register --name [appname] --app-repo “[repo github url, same as in repos.json]”. you can use following script (save as ps1) to register apps in batch. Please change the folder path to reflect the path in your machine:
$modernize = "C:\codes\BUILD2026\modernize-cli\src\GitHub.Copilot.Modernization.Cli\bin\Debug\net10.0\modernize.exe"
$repos = (Get-Content "C:\codes\BUILD2026\repos.json" | ConvertFrom-Json).repos

foreach ($repo in $repos) {
    Write-Host "Registering app: $($repo.name) -> $($repo.url)"
    & $modernize cc app register --name $repo.name --app-repo $repo.url
}

Create project for command center via modernize cli:
-	modernize cc project create --name "BUILD2026" --goal "modernize Zava app and deploy to Azure"
 
Bind project with all apps:
-	modernize cc project app add --project [projectname] –app [appname]
you can use this script (save as .ps1 file) to batch add apps to this project:
$modernize = "C:\codes\BUILD2026\modernize-cli\src\GitHub.Copilot.Modernization.Cli\bin\Debug\net10.0\modernize.exe"
$repos = (Get-Content " C:\codes\BUILD2026\repos.json" | ConvertFrom-Json).repos

foreach ($repo in $repos) {
    Write-Host "Adding app to project: $($repo.name)"
    & $modernize cc project app add --project "BUILD2026" --app $repo.name
}
 
Put  assessment-config.yaml into the same folder with modernize cli, to config assessment

Do batch assessment:
-	modernize cc assess --project [projectname] --delegate cloud --assess-config ./assessment-config.yaml
 
7.	Now go to github.com repositories, Agents · GitHub Copilot 
 
8.	When terminal shows Cloud Agent jobs done, go to github, show PRs.
Outcome: One aggregated summary report with individual detail reports 
2.3 — Announcing Command Center (Private Preview)
1. launch command center: modernize cc serve (it will read config.json in #3) 

2.4 — Planning with Guardrails: The Rulebook
1. Create a rulebook from command center. Main menu-> playbook-> new and paste the rulebook content for Java.
2. repeat the same step for .NET
3. show the content of the rulebook from command center

2.5 — Extensibility Create Custom Logic: Custom Skills
1. copy PII and kafka2eventhub skills from https://github.com/bradygaster/Build2026GHCPAppModDemoWare/commit/1a570ad32e0d9bb28585538b939191326a9a1299 and create it in your vscode project
2. show the those two skills
2.6 — Execute the Java Workstream: Struts → Spring Boot + Azure 
Prereq: enable re-architect task: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/developer/java/migration/github-copilot-app-modernization-for-java-rearchitecture?context=/azure/developer/github-copilot-app-modernization/context/context
1. zava payment gateway does not contain logging or MQ. Let’s first introduce these two components in a non zava compliant way. (directly calling Kafka and printing out PII data in logs) see introduced non-compliant code in payment gateway (struts version) · seanli1988/Build2026GHCPAppModDemoWare@cddbbbf
2. Execute the zava pay gateway app modernization from command center. This is needed because we need to tie the status back to command center after the execution is complete. New project -> select all apps under the current repo -> create a plan -> modernization goal: Rewrite the zava payment gateway from Struts to Java 21 and latest SpringBoot into another directory.
3. step 1 will create a github issue. Open this issue and follow the instructions in vscode.
Migrated payment gateway app is in the main branch (IaC files included ) https://github.com/seanli1988/Build2026GHCPAppModDemoWare/tree/main/ZavaPayGateway 
4. close the issue in vscode once the rewrite is complete. 
2.8 — Manage the Projects: Back to Command Center
1. come back to command center. Under the execution tab, the migration status is updated to complete. (you many need to refresh the page).
Outcome: zava pay gateway app transformed to spring boot and written to the zavapaygateway-springboot folder.
2.9 — See It Running: Apps in Azure
From VS Code, under common tasks
 

 
2.7 Demo Steps — Execute the .NET Workstream: Web Forms → Blazor + Aspire
VS Code:
1.	Open the ZavaLoanPortal folder in VS Code 
2.	Make sure you have the GitHub Copilot modernization extension installed and make sure the `GitHub Copilot modernization for .NET` extension is updated to the latest
3.	Select the modernize-dotnet agent from the agent picker and use model claude opus 4.7
4.	Send the following prompt: `I want to upgrade my project to .NET 10. My project has WebForms so I also want to move them to Blazor`
5.	Once the WebForms project migrated to Blazor send the following prompt: `Add Aspire`
6.	Select the following configurations: 
 

Visual Studio:
1.	Open the ZavaLoanPortal.sln in Visual Studio 2026 main
i.	18.8.0 Insiders [11820.244.main] install from here: https://aka.ms/vs/int.main/vs_enterprise.exe
2.	Right click on the solution in Solution Explorer and select “Modernize”
3.	Select model Claude Opus 4.7
4.	From Copilot Chat type: `I want to upgrade my project to .NET 10. My project has WebForms so I also want to move them to Blazor`
5.	Once the WebForms project migrated to Blazor send the following prompt: `Add Aspire`
